                                              Observation of a Displaced Squeezed State in

                                                            High-Harmonic Generation
                                                   David Theidel1*, Viviane Cotte1 , Philip Heinzel2 ,
                                               Houssna Griguer1 , Mateusz Weis1 , René Sondenheimer2, 3 ,
                                                                    Hamed Merdji1




arXiv:2411.02311v2 [quant-ph] 9 Dec 2024
                                             1 Laboratoire d’Optique Appliquée, ENSTA ParisTech, CNRS, École

                                           polytechnique, 828 Boulevard des Maréchaux, Palaiseau, 91120, France.
                                               2 Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Institute of Condensed Matter

                                                  Theory and Optics, Max-Wien-Platz 1, Jena, 07743, Germany.
                                           3 Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Optics and Precision Engineering IOF,

                                                           Albert-Einstein-Str. 7, Jena, 07745, Germany.


                                           *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): david.theidel@polytechnique.edu;


                                                                            Abstract
                                             High harmonic generation is a resource of extremely broad frequency
                                             combs of ultrashort light pulses. The non-classical nature of this new
                                             quantum source has been recently evidenced in semiconductors by
                                             showing that high harmonic generation generates multimode squeezed
                                             states of light. Applications in quantum information science require the
                                             knowledge of the mode structure of the created states, defining how
                                             the quantum properties distribute over the spectral modes. To achieve
                                             that, an effective Schmidt decomposition of the reduced photonic state
                                             is performed on a tripartite harmonic set by simultaneously measur-
                                             ing the second- and third-order intensity correlation function. The
                                             Schmidt number is estimated which indicates an almost single-mode
                                             structure for the each harmonic, a useful resource in quantum technol-
                                             ogy. By modelling our data with a displaced squeezed state, we retrieve
                                             the dependencies of the measured correlation as a function of the high
                                             harmonic driving laser intensity. The effective high-harmonic mode
                                             distribution is retrieved, and the strength of the contributing squeez-
                                             ing modes is estimated. Additionally, we demonstrate a significant
                                             violation of a Cauchy-Schwarz-type inequality for three biseparable


                                                                                1
     partitions by multiple standard deviations. Our results confirm non-
     classicality of the high-harmonic generation process in semiconductors
     . The source operates at room temperature with compact lasers, and
     it could become a useful resource for future applications in quantum
     technologies.




Introduction

Non-classical sources of light are a versatile resource in quantum information science

and technology [1], thanks to their unique properties like entanglement and squeez-

ing to boost metrology [2–4], imaging [5, 6], or establish secure communication [7–9].

Another promising prospect is photonic quantum simulation [10–12] that use displaced

squeezed states of light, superposed to simulate arbitrary quantum systems. The main

advantages of photonic quantum states are their robustness against decoherence due

to their low interaction with the environment. Furthermore, the agility of light manip-

ulation offers the possibility of encoding high-dimensional entanglement in time bins,

frequency bins, or topological states [13].

   It is important to determine the mode structures of engineered quantum states. The

concept of modes is well known in classical electromagnetism and refers to multiple

solutions of the Maxwell equations. The electromagnetic field can propagate in e.g.,

different spatial, polarization, or spectral modes. Here, we are instead investigating the

distribution of quantum mechanical properties, which are not necessarily restricted to

one optical mode [14]. The mode analysis of quantum states is of great importance, as

it leverages engineering to monitor and select favourable modes for specific photonic

quantum state applications [15–17].

   To this extent, higher-order intensity correlation functions can be analyzed to infer

the underlying modal distribution of the generated state. Being closely connected to

the moment-generating functions, higher-order photon number correlation functions




                                              2
probe properties like the width or skewness of the underlying photon number distri-

bution. In the case of multimode squeezed states of light, they can also, under some

assumptions, be used to estimate the modal squeezer distribution [18]. Based on this,

entanglement can be quantified by an analysis of the multimodal structure through

an effective Schmidt mode decomposition.

   In this work, we analyze the modal distribution of a non-classical state of light

generated by a new source of quantum light, high harmonic generation (HHG), by

measuring higher-order correlation functions. The non-classicality of a tripartite har-

monic state is demonstrated through the violation of a multimode Cauchy-Schwarz

inequality (CSI). Here, the discrete nature of the HHG light and the strong correla-

tion between photons of different harmonic orders are responsible for the violation of

the CSI. Further, we extend existing techniques analyzing a squeezed vacuum state

[18–20], to a more general one including displacement of the state.

   Theoretical works on HHG show the potential of the process to be employed as

a highly versatile source of non-classical light. HHG is a non-perturbative frequency

upconversion process that can generate broadband frequency combs covering a spectral

range from the near-infrared down to the extreme ultraviolet [21–23]. The attosecond

time structure of the HHG pulse is inherited from its underlying highly non-linear

interaction of the electrons with the periodically oscillating driving electric field poten-

tial of an ultrashort pulse of light. This petahertz-frequency electron wave-packet

pendulum generates then attosecond bursts of light as a response to the strong field

interaction.

   Non-classical effects in HHG open new avenues to be explored, exploiting the

broadband generation of non-classical photon correlation, multi-partite entanglement

[24, 25] and attosecond control of squeezed states of light [26], as well as conditioned

generation of cat states [27, 28]. The first experimental work on semiconductor HHG




                                             3
(SHHG) reported the generation of squeezed states of light [29] and addressing HHG

statistical and spectral properties by driving the process with non-classical light [30].

   In this letter, we explore the mode decomposition of SHHG from a cadmium tel-

luride (CdTe) crystal, which has reported a high conversion efficiency [31], making it

favorable for signal-demanding quantum information applications. By simultaneously

measuring the second-order correlation function (SCF) and third-order correlation

function (TCF), we extract information about the modal structure and parameters of

the state generated. Further, we confirm previous results showing multimode squeezed

light [29]. The violation of a multimode Cauchy-Schwarz-type inequality (CSI) is

shown to be even more significant in CdTe compared to previous studies [29].

   A displaced squeezed state of light is verified by our measurement supported by

numerical simulation. Our analysis shows that, in addition to squeezing, displacement

is necessary to explain the observed dependencies of correlation functions on the driv-

ing laser intensity. Based on the Schmidt decomposition, the dimensionality of the

state is estimated.


Measurement of the multimode Cauchy-Schwarz
inequality

The experimental demonstration is performed using a fiber-based laser system gen-

erating short-wavelength infrared (SWIR), ultrashort femtosecond pulses to excite

SHHG in CdTe with [110] crystal cut and select three harmonics from the third to the

fifth order (Fig. S1). The non-perturbative regime of SHHG is monitored by obser-

vation of the intensity crossovers, which are clearly visible for all of the harmonic

orders (Fig. S4). Using spectrally selective dichroic mirrors and spectral bandpass fil-

ters, we direct each high-harmonic order towards a beamsplitter behind which two

single-photon resolving avalanche photodiodes are placed. The full experimental setup




                                           4
is shown in Fig. S2. This Hanbury-Brown-Twiss (HBT) like configuration allows us to

retrieve the SCF expressed as


                            (2)           ⟨a†i (τ )a†j (0)ai (0)aj (τ )⟩
                           gij (τ ) =                                            ,               (1)
                                        ⟨a†i (0)ai (0)⟩⟨a†j (τ )aj (τ )⟩
where a† and a denote the creation and annihilation operators of photons in the

mode i or j representing two of the three central spectral modes of three harmonic

states H3, H4, and H5. As the HHG pulses have a duration much shorter than the

timing resolution of the detection, we effectively perform a broadband, multimode

measurement


                                                  dω2 ⟨â†i (ω1 )â†j (ω2 )âi (ω1 )âj (ω2 )⟩
                                    R          R
                (2)       (2)            dω1
               gij (0) ≡ gij = R                                                                 (2)
                                        dω1 ⟨â†i (ω1 )âi (ω1 )⟩ dω2 ⟨â†j (ω2 )âj (ω2 )⟩
                                                                  R

where the convolution of the photon statistics of the spectral modes is measured

[18, 19, 29]. In turn, this acquisition is sensitive to squeezing effects in the radiation. We

observe a characteristic transition of the SCF when adjusting the driving laser intensity
       (2)           (2)
from gij ≫ 2 to gij = 1 (Fig. S5). Connecting the SCF to the photon statistics of

the radiation, these values indicate a pronounced Super-Poissonian photon number

distribution in each of the measured harmonic orders. This distinctive dependence

on the driving laser intensity and strong inter-beam correlations are indicative of the

presence of two-mode squeezing in the HHG as reported in previous works [19, 29, 32].

   We evaluate a multimode Cauchy-Schwarz inequality expressed as

                                                   h     i2
                                           (2) (2)   (2)
                                          gii gjj ≥ gij                                          (3)




                                                     5
Fig. 1: From the experimental data in Fig. S5 we evaluate the R parameter, given
as Eq. (4). For all bipartite sets at all driving laser intensities we observe R > 1 with
high significance, confirming that the generated state from SHHG is non-classical. The
error bars are calculated from the multiple repetitions as indicated in the experimental
data. The pairwise CSI violation and the observation of two-mode squeezing signatures
imply the generation of three entangled biseparable states.


to confirm the presence of non-classical correlations between the harmonic states. We

calculate the R parameter defined as

                                              h          i2
                                                   (2)
                                                  gij
                                     Rij :=       (2) (2)
                                                                                       (4)
                                              gii gjj


from the experimental data, such that a violation of the CSI corresponds to R > 1. The

results are shown in Fig. 1, where we obtain a significant violation for all bipartite sets

from the experimental data (complete data set displayed in Fig. S5). The CSI is known

to be violated from two-mode squeezed states, as shown by theory [33] and experiment

and proves the presence of non-classical correlations between the analysed modes [34].

Indeed, the bipartite reductions correspond most likely to a two-mode squeezed state,

exhibiting entanglement between modes. The tripartite state, as illustrated in Fig. 1,


                                              6
can therefore be interpreted as three entangled biseparable states. Genuine tripartite

entanglement is out reach here it requires entanglement measures beyond the current

study [35].


Estimation of the mode distribution

Further, insights in the modal structure of the generated squeezed state of light can be

obtained by simultaneous measurement of the SCF and TCF [18, 19]. The broadband

TCF is given as




                                           dω3 ⟨â†i (ω1 )â†j (ω2 )â†k (ω3 )âi (ω1 )âj (ω2 )âk (ω3 )⟩
                       R         R         R
             (3)           dω1       dω2
            gijk = R                                                                                       .   (5)
                       dω1 ⟨â†i (ω1 )âi (ω1 )⟩ dω2 ⟨â†j (ω2 )âj (ω2 )⟩ dω3 ⟨â†k (ω3 )âk (ω3 )⟩
                                                R                               R


   Being closely linked to the generating moments, measuring higher order cor-

relations can give further insights into the underlying photon number probability

distribution function. Indeed for squeezed vacuum states the analysis of the simulta-

neous measurement of g (2) and g (3) can be used to estimate the broadband squeezing

distribution, the squeezing strength and the effective cooperativity parameter K

[19, 20].

   The adapted experimental setup is shown in Fig. S3. We select a single harmonic

order to a single-beam configuration and add an additional beamsplitter behind the

dichroic mirror. At the three outputs of this configuration, the single-photon avalanche

diodes are placed and connected to the time tagging device to acquire the two-fold

and three-fold coincidence counts to simultaneously acquire the SCF and TCF.

   By normalizing the raw triple coincidences (Fig. 2a)) to the height of the off-
                                                                                             (3)
diagonal peaks, we calculate the third-order correlation function giii . Details on the

data treatment can be found in the methods section. By changing the driving laser

intensity, we obtain a set of data with distinctive values for intrabeam correlations



                                                          7
Fig. 2: Figure a) shows the raw dataset of the triple coincidence counts for the fourth
harmonic using the setup in S3. The colormap encodes the relative number of triple
coincidences per second. The periodic grid appears due to the pulsed excitation. The
spacing between the peaks coincides with the time difference between the ultrashort
laser pulses used for the excitation of the SHHG process. We calculate the TCF by
normalizing the raw three-fold coincidences with respect to the mean height of the
peaks. Peaks which are placed on the diagonal and as well as the peaks in the first
row and first column are not taken into account for then normalization, as they may
contain correlations from photons generated in the same pulse, and thus might not be
uncorrelated. The figures b) and c) show the results from the joint measurement of
the SCF and TCF in a single-beam setup (Fig. S3) for the fourth harmonic depicted
                                                   (2)     (3)
in blue. An almost linear relationship between g44 and g444 is apparent in Figure a).
                             (2)
Figure b) shows the SCF g44 over the loss-corrected mean photon number per pulse
⟨n⟩. The green curve is the result from a simulation of a multimode, displaced squeezed
thermal state from which the respective observable are calculated. The simulation
reproduces well the measured values and suggest that the SHHG state is a displaced
squeezed state. A similar analysis is shown for the dataset of the fifth harmonic in
Fig. S6.

 (2)       (3)
gii and giii . Similar to the analysis carried out in [19, 20], we establish a linear rela-

tionship between these two parameters (Fig. 2 and Fig. S6), from which we estimate

the squeezing strength and distribution. As a result, the generated state can be inter-

preted as a displaced squeezed state in contrast to the squeezed vacuum state analyzed

in [19, 20].

   Motivated by the interaction Hamiltonian modelling the SHHG process [29], we

base our analysis on a simulated multimode system of a multimodal Gaussian state. In



                                            8
Fig. 3: Estimated squeezer distribution for the fourth (blue) and fifth harmonic
(orange), calculated from a datapoint of the simulated multimode, displaced squeezed
states from Fig. 2 and Fig. S6. Multiple modes exhibit non-neglible squeezing with
a maximum squeezing level of 8.5 dB for the fourth harmonic and 7.53 dB for
the fifth harmonic. Additionally, we calculate the effective Schmidt numbers to be
KH4, eff = 1.43 (KH5, eff = 1.23).


the most general case, this includes multimode displacement, squeezing and rotation

of the vacuum in case of a pure state. However, for the purpose of modelling the state,

we neglect rotations in a first analysis, since they can be switched past squeezing and

displacement operators to act on the vacuum first [36]. The actual state generated

might be more refined with rotations present among the modes. However, this aspect

is beyond the scope of our current explorative analysis. We would like to emphasize

at this point that more detailed theory investigations, beyond the current state of the

art of such systems, are necessary to properly determine the impact of such effects.

Consequently, we use the fact that the vacuum is an eigenstate of a rotation with

eigenvalue 1 which leaves us with only a squeezing and displacement operation. For

simplicity, we have also forgone the inclusion of two beam squeezing between spectral

modes for now, such that the squeezing matrix is diagonal, and the operator can be


                                          9
decomposed into k single beam squeezer. In order to take losses into account, we do

not restrict the subsequent analysis to pure states (squeezing and displacement) but

allow for a general mixed Gaussian state, i.e., a displaced, squeezed thermal state [37].

   The density matrix of such a state goes along the following standard formulation:

                                  d
                                        D̂k (α)Ŝk (ζ)ρth,k Ŝk† (ζ)D̂k† (α)
                                  O
                           ρk =                                                         (6)
                                  k=1



where D̂k (α)     =   exp (αk aˆk † − αk∗ aˆk ) is the displacement operator, Ŝk (ζ)    =
            † 2        2
exp {(ζk∗ (aˆk ) − ζk aˆk )/2} the squeezing operator with ζk = rk · exp (iθk ) and ρth,k =
P
  n P (nk )|n⟩⟨n| the density matrix of a thermal state with occupation number nk

and d the number of spectral modes constituting the corresponding SHHG mode. We

discretize the integrals in equation Eq. (1)


                                                       ⟨â† â† âl âm ⟩
                                            Pd Pd
                              g   (2)
                                        ≈ Pdl † m Pl d m †                              (7)
                                           l ⟨âl âl ⟩     m ⟨âm âm ⟩



and assume uncorrelated squeezer modes. This simplifies the numerator in the case

l ̸= m to products of expectation values of photon number operators. The integral

expression Eq. (5) is discretized analogously. Further, we parametrize the squeezing
                                   p
parameter as rk = B ·λk with λk = 1 − µ2 µk , assuming a 2D Gaussian joint-spectral

density distribution (JSD) [19] with an underlying, normalized thermal squeezer dis-

tribution characterized by the thermal occupation parameter µ. The assumption of a

Gaussian JSD is justified through the use of narrowband spectral filters [38].

   The strength of the process B is assumed to be isotropic for all modes k as well as

isotropic displacement over the modes αk = α and nk = n. Finally θk = 0.

   We note that these assumptions are primarily made to simplify the simulations in

accordance with [19, 20]. However, they may still serve as a rough estimation of the




                                                    10
underlying parameters, as the state generated in SHHG is likely Gaussian in a first

approximation.

   In total, the parameters B, µ, α and nth are employed to create k states specified

by Eq. (6).

   Different values for the SCF, TCF and mean photon number ⟨n⟩ are obtained by

subsequently including up to d = 50 modes to the simulation [39]. The convergence

of the simulation is verified by decreasing the number of modes by 15 and confirming

that the same parameters and estimated Schmidt number is obtained. Additionally

the simulated data points, shown as green points in Fig. 2b) and 2c), show excellent

convergence to the experimental data with an increase of k. The parameters for both

datasets on the fourth and fifth harmonics are found by minimizing the root mean

square deviation between the data and the obtained values from the simulation on the

g (2) vs. g (3) and ⟨n⟩ vs. g (2) dataset. The results for the fourth and fifth harmonic are

shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. S6. The simulation reproduces the experimentally observed

dependence well. For both measured harmonic orders we find, that a state with non-

negligible squeezing is needed to interpret the experimental data. In the case of the

fourth harmonic, the optimal parameters are found to be Bopt,4 = 0.471, µopt,4 =

0.4226, αopt,4 = 0.127 and nth,opt,4 = 0.001. For the fifth harmonic Bopt,5 = 0.397,

µopt,5 = 0.32, αopt,5 = 0.161 and nth,opt,5 = 0.001 . From the numerical analysis we

estimate the effective Schmidt number Keff = 1/ k λ4k [40] as KH4, eff = 1.43 and
                                                   P

KH5, eff = 1.23.

   Despite restrictive parameter assumptions, we find the simulations of the model to

be in good agreement with the experimental data and fitting well the interpretation

of the observed scaling of the correlation functions with the driving laser intensity due

to the broad squeezer distribution, as previously suggested in [29]. The deviations of

the experimental data, could originate from the finite data size introducing a statisti-

cal uncertainty, which becomes more pronounced for a low number of mean photons



                                            11
[20]. Still, our interpretation and numerical analysis provides a good explanation. As

the SHHG process is highly complex and the theoretical work on understanding the

emergence of quantum features has just recently started, we expect that other intrin-

sic effects such as light-matter entanglement might contribute to the observed features

of the data [41].


Discussion

In summary, we present a thorough analysis of the second and third-order photon

number correlation function of the state created in SHHG. In a three-beam config-

uration, we measure the violation of the CSI in the bipartite partitions, a strong

signature for non-classical correlations. This result motivates for an investigation of

genuine tripartite entanglement in SHHG. Indeed, in quantum information science,

especially computing, a central goal is to generate fully controllable entangled states

featuring increasingly many (N > 2) particles. SHHG could potentially meet this

key requirement for quantum advantage. We restrict here our quantum correlations

studies to three biseparable states and further investigate for a specific harmonic the

behaviour of the second- and third-order correlation function with the driving laser

intensity. The data are representative of a displaced squeezed thermal state. On the

basis of the numerical analysis, a Schmidt decomposition is performed to quantify the

mode structure of the state generated and estimate the effective Schmidt number and

squeezing strength of the spectral modes. This result confirms and extends previous

work reporting two-mode squeezed states from SHHG [29]. The presence of displace-

ment and squeezing of the SHHG state, show the complexity and future prospects for

fine control of the state generated using advanced quantum engineering. Spectrally

entangled states are major resources in quantum information science and emerging

technologies such as quantum metrology, computing, and cryptography.




                                          12
   Our findings further establish the application of quantum optical methods to the

tripartite SHHG state and are, to the best of our knowledge, a unique study of the

squeezer distribution generated from SHHG. With this, we pave the way for further

studies and applications of the displaced squeezed state generated via SHHG. This

further establishes SHHG as a highly promising candidate for applications in the broad

field of quantum state engineering, gaining possible quantum advantage due to the

potential high dimensionality of the HHG bosonic platform [42].


Methods

Our experimental setups are based on a 200 mW all-fiber pulsed laser system with a

central wavelength of 2100 nm and a repetition rate of 18.66 MHz. The ultrashort laser

pulses with a duration of 80 fs are linearly polarized and focused on the CdTe[110]

crystal with a focal length of 2.5 cm. Before, a half-wave plate and polarizer combi-

nation allowed us to adjust the driving laser intensity. After the sample, a slightly

closed aperture and infrared filter separate the driving laser light from the generated

high-harmonic orders. An additional broadband polarizer removes the luminescence

background of the SHHG signal. The SHHG radiation is collimated and the harmonic

modes 3 to 5 spatially separated by means of dichroic mirrors and spectral filters. For

the measurement of the SCF, a beamsplitter is placed behind each spectral filter, and

the two outputs are focused on single photon avalanche diodes (SPADs). They are con-

nected to a time-to-digital converter (TDC), recording the arrival time of the photons

registered on the SPADs. From the time-stamps, the mean photon number as well as

intra- and interbeam correlation are calculated. To record the threefold coincidence

counts, a single harmonic order is selected, and two beamsplitters are placed behind

the spectral filter. Behind the three beamsplitter outputs, the SPADs are placed and

threefold coincidence recorded via the TDC. At the same time, the two outputs of

the second beamsplitter are used to record coincidence counts. In both setups, care is



                                          13
taken to not saturate the binary detectors by having an event rate of less than one

photon per pulse.


Data treatment and simulation

Assuming that coincidence events from photons created in subsequent pump pulses are

uncorrelated, yielding g (2) = 1, we normalize the raw coincidence counts with respect

to the satellite peaks. For the calculation of the SCF, Gaussian peaks with a coefficient

of determination of at least 90 %. In total, the normalization is then performed over

40 satellite peaks with a percentage coefficient of variation of the root mean square

deviation (RMSD) of approximately 15 %. The maximum value of a fitted Gaussian

to the central peak is used as the final value of g (2) (0). The error bars are calculated

from around 10 repetitions of the experiment.

   A similar approach is followed to obtain the TCF. The raw three-fold coincidence

counts shown in Fig. 2a) are normalized with respect to the satellite peaks, as g (3) = 1

for uncorrelated events. Only off-diagonal satellite peaks are accounted for, and the

first row and first column are neglected as well. For these, photon events from the same

laser pulse could create a threefold coincidence event. A peak-finding algorithm is used

to identify the maxima and, again, about 50 satellite peaks with a total coefficient of

variation of less than 15 %. The value g (3) (0) is the read as the maximum value of

the central peak in the normalized dataset. The error bars for g (3) = 1 are likewise

calculated as the standard deviation over the same number of repetitions.

   For the numerical simulation, the QuTiP Python framework is employed. A set of

k displaced squeezed thermal states is specified with the parameters mentioned in the

main text. An optimization algorithm is used to find the parameters that approach

our dataset the best. To the right, the mean square error is calculated as the linear

best fit to the experimental data, to the linear best fit of the simulated values. For the

g (2) vs. ⟨n⟩ dataset, a power fit is used instead. The total error to minimize is the sum



                                           14
out of these two errors. In this sense, we optimize the parameters for both datasets

simultaneously.

Supplementary information.         The supplementary information contains Figures

S1 - S6.

Acknowledgements.        We acknowledge support on the single photon detection by

Milutin Kovacev from the Institute of Quantum Optics Hanover. We thank the par-

ticipants of the Extreme Quantum Optics Workshop 2024 for discussions. P.H. and

R.S. acknowledge funding by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German

Research Foundation) – Project-ID 398816777 – SFB 1375 NOA.


Declarations

Contributions

D.T. conceived the study and performed the experiments. D.T., V.C. and P.H. ana-

lyzed the data. D.T., P.H. and R.S. conducted the theoretical analysis. D.T. wrote the

simulation. D.T. provided the plots. D.T., H.M., P.H. and R.S. wrote the manuscript

with input from all authors. H.M. initiated the quantum HHG research program and

acquired the funding. All authors discussed the results.


Competing interests

The authors declare no competing financial interests.




                                          15
References

[1] O’brien, J. L., Furusawa, A. & Vučković, J. Photonic quantum technologies.

   Nature Photonics 3, 687–695 (2009).


[2] Polino, E., Valeri, M., Spagnolo, N. & Sciarrino, F. Photonic quantum metrology.

   AVS Quantum Science 2, 024703 (2020). URL https://pubs.aip.org/aqs/article/

   2/2/024703/997285/Photonic-quantum-metrology.


[3] Schnabel, R. Squeezed states of light and their applications in laser interferome-

   ters. Physics Reports 684, 1–51 (2017).


[4] Gessner, M., Smerzi, A. & Pezzè, L.      Multiparameter squeezing for optimal

   quantum enhancements in sensor networks. Nature communications 11, 3817

   (2020).


[5] Defienne, H. et al. Advances in quantum imaging. Nature Photonics (2024). URL

   https://www.nature.com/articles/s41566-024-01516-w.


[6] Moreau, P.-A., Toninelli, E., Gregory, T. & Padgett, M. J. Imaging with quantum

   states of light. Nature Reviews Physics 1, 367–380 (2019).


[7] Braunstein, S. L. & van Loock, P.         Quantum information with continuous

   variables. Quantum information with continuous variables 77 (2005).


[8] Gottesman, D. & Preskill, J. Secure quantum key distribution using squeezed

   states. Quantum Information with Continuous Variables 317–356 (2003).


[9] Yonezawa, H., Aoki, T. & Furusawa, A. Demonstration of a quantum teleporta-

   tion network for continuous variables. Nature 431, 430–433 (2004).




                                         16
[10] Zhong, H.-S. et al. Quantum computational advantage using photons. Sci-

    ence 370, 1460–1463 (2020). URL https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.

    abe8770.


[11] Cai, Y. et al. Multimode entanglement in reconfigurable graph states using optical

    frequency combs. Nature communications 8, 15645 (2017).


[12] Walmsley, I.      Light in quantum computing and simulation: perspective.

    Optica Quantum 1, 35 (2023). URL https://opg.optica.org/abstract.cfm?URI=

    opticaq-1-1-35.


[13] Erhard, M., Krenn, M. & Zeilinger, A. Advances in high-dimensional quantum

    entanglement. Nature Reviews Physics 2, 365–381 (2020).


[14] Fabre, C. & Treps, N. Modes and states in quantum optics. Reviews of Modern

    Physics 92, 035005 (2020).


[15] Wang, J. et al.     Multidimensional quantum entanglement with large-scale

    integrated optics. Science 360, 285–291 (2018).


[16] Wright, L. G., Renninger, W. H., Christodoulides, D. N. & Wise, F. W. Nonlinear

    multimode photonics: nonlinear optics with many degrees of freedom. Optica 9,

    824–841 (2022).


[17] Caldwell, E. D., Sinclair, L. C., Newbury, N. R. & Deschenes, J.-D. The time-

    programmable frequency comb and its use in quantum-limited ranging. Nature

    610, 667–673 (2022).


[18] Laiho, K., Dirmeier, T., Schmidt, M., Reitzenstein, S. & Marquardt, C. Measuring

    higher-order photon correlations of faint quantum light: A short review. Physics

    Letters A 435, 128059 (2022). URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/

    S0375960122001414.

                                          17
[19] Christ, A., Laiho, K., Eckstein, A., Cassemiro, K. N. & Silberhorn, C. Probing

    multimode squeezing with correlation functions. New Journal of Physics 13,

    033027 (2011). URL https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1367-2630/13/3/

    033027.


[20] Wakui, K. et al. Ultrabroadband direct detection of nonclassical photon statistics

    at telecom wavelength. Scientific Reports 4, 4535 (2014). URL https://www.

    nature.com/articles/srep04535.


[21] Krausz, F. & Ivanov, M. Attosecond physics. Reviews of modern physics 81,

    163–234 (2009).


[22] Ghimire, S. et al. Strong-field and attosecond physics in solids. Journal of Physics

    B: Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics 47, 204030 (2014). URL https://

    iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/0953-4075/47/20/204030.


[23] Yue, L. & Gaarde, M. B. Introduction to theory of high-harmonic generation in

    solids: tutorial. Journal of the Optical Society of America B 39, 535 (2022). URL

    https://opg.optica.org/abstract.cfm?URI=josab-39-2-535.


[24] Gorlach, A., Neufeld, O., Rivera, N., Cohen, O. & Kaminer, I. The quantum-

    optical nature of high harmonic generation. Nature communications 11, 4598

    (2020).


[25] Sloan, J. et al. Entangling extreme ultraviolet photons through strong field

    pair generation (2023). URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2309.16466. ArXiv:2309.16466

    [physics, physics:quant-ph].


[26] Stammer, P. et al. Entanglement and squeezing of the optical field modes in high

    harmonic generation. Physical Review Letters 132, 143603 (2024).




                                           18
[27] Lewenstein, M. et al.     Attosecond Physics and Quantum Information Sci-

    ence (2022). URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2208.14769. ArXiv:2208.14769 [physics,

    physics:quant-ph].


[28] Rivera-Dean, J. et al. Nonclassical states of light after high-harmonic generation

    in semiconductors: A Bloch-based perspective. Physical Review B 109, 035203

    (2024). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.109.035203.


[29] Theidel, D. et al. Evidence of the quantum-optical nature of high-harmonic

    generation (2024).    URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15022.       ArXiv:2405.15022

    [quant-ph], (accepted in PRX Quantum).


[30] Rasputnyi, A. et al. High-harmonic generation by a bright squeezed vacuum.

    Nature Physics 1–6 (2024).


[31] Long, Z. et al. High-harmonic generation in cdte with ultra-low pump intensity

    and high photon flux. Communications Physics 6, 228 (2023).


[32] Cardoso, F. R., Rossatto, D. Z., Fernandes, G. P., Higgins, G. & Villas-Boas, C. J.

    Superposition of two-mode squeezed states for quantum information processing

    and quantum sensing. Physical Review A 103, 062405 (2021).


[33] Peng, J. & Li, G. Introduction to modern quantum optics (World Scientific,

    Singapore, 1998).


[34] Wasak, T., Szańkowski, P., Trippenbach, M. & Chwedeńczuk, J. Cauchy–Schwarz

    inequality for general measurements as an entanglement criterion. Quantum

    Information Processing 15, 269–278 (2016). URL http://link.springer.com/10.

    1007/s11128-015-1181-z.




                                          19
[35] Cobucci, G. & Tavakoli, A. Detecting the dimensionality of genuine multiparticle

    entanglement. Science Advances 10, eadq4467 (2024).


[36] Ma, X. & Rhodes, W. Multimode squeeze operators and squeezed states. Physical

    Review A 41, 4625 (1990).


[37] Yuan, H.-C. & Xu, X.-X. Squeezed vacuum state in lossy channel as a squeezed

    thermal state. Modern Physics Letters B 29, 1550219 (2015).


[38] Zielnicki, K. et al. Joint spectral characterization of photon-pair sources. Journal

    of Modern Optics 65, 1141–1160 (2018).


[39] Johansson, J. R., Nation, P. D. & Nori, F.        Qutip: An open-source python

    framework for the dynamics of open quantum systems.              Computer physics

    communications 183, 1760–1772 (2012).


[40] Eberly, J. Schmidt analysis of pure-state entanglement. Laser physics 16, 921–926

    (2006).


[41] Rivera-Dean, J. et al. Light-matter entanglement after above-threshold ionization

    processes in atoms. Physical Review A 106, 063705 (2022).


[42] Yi, S., Babushkin, I., Smirnova, O. & Ivanov, M. Generation of massively entan-

    gled bright states of light during harmonic generation in resonant media. arXiv

    preprint arXiv:2401.02817 (2024).




                                           20
Fig. S1: The spectrum shows the three investigated high-harmonics. The grey area
represents the width of the spectral filters employed in the experimental setup. Spectral
filtering is already a mode selection, as we thereby reduce the width of the squeezer
distribution.




                                                          (2)
Fig. S2: Experimental setup for measuring the SCF gij . The ultrashort pulses are
directed through a half-wave plate followed by a polarizer to control the driving laser
intensity. The near-infrared pulses are focused on the CdTe[110] sample in which
the SHHG process is induced. An aperture and infrared filter are placed behind the
sample to filter the pump light. A second polarizer is placed to filter the luminescent
background created in the sample. The three harmonic orders are collimated with an
achromatic doublet and directed towards the dichroic mirrors to spatially separate
the different frequencies. Behind the spectral filters, a beamsplitter is placed and
the photons are measured with single photon avalanche diodes. The detectors are
connected to a time-to-digital converter to record the arrival times of the photons,
from which the SCF is calculated.




                                           21
Fig. S3: The experimental setup to measure the SCF and TCF in a single beam
configuration. The setup is similar to Fig. S2 up to the collimation lens. Here, only one
high-harmonic order is selected with a dichroic mirror and a spectral filter. Behind the
spectral filter, two beamsplitters are placed and the radiation at the three outputs of
the beamsplitter focused onto the single photon avalanche diodes. These are connected
to a time-to-digital converter to record the arrival times of the photon and calculate
the SCF as well as TCF.




                                           22
Fig. S4: The graph shows the loss-corrected number of photons per pulse over the
driving laser intensity. For all recorded high-harmonic orders an intensity crossover is
apparent, at which the dependency changes from a pertubative to a non-perturbative
scaling law. The fitted curves are a best fit of a power law and the perturbative scaling
law is depicted to ease the comparison.




                                           23
                                                                (2)
Fig. S5: The graphic depicts the auto- and cross-correlations gij for the three different
harmonic acquired with the setup shown in Fig. S2. A clear transition from super-
bunching with g (2) > 2 towards Poissonian photon statistics g (2) = 1 is visible. This
behaviour is characteristic for a photonic state exhibiting multimode squeezing. As
the driving laser intensity is increased, the squeezer distribution is broadened and a
convolution of the photon statistics of the individual spectral modes is measured. As
these are uncorrelated with each other, it results in a transitions towards g (2) = 1.
For low driving laser intensities, only few squeezing modes are excited such that the
Super-Poissonian photon number distribution is resolved.




                                           24
Fig. S6: Similar to Fig. 2, the measured SCF over TCF at time delay zero is shown
as the blue points in the left figure. The right graph depicts the SCF over the mean
photon number per pulse. Again, an optimization algorithm is employed to retrieve
the parameters, for which a displaced squeezed thermal state reproduces the observed
behaviour. The result of the simulation is shown as the green curves. The trend is
reproduced well by the numerical comparison.




                                        25
